Add blog post about new docker images (#195)
conan-io/conan-io.github.io: _posts/2021-07-21-Modern-docker-images.markdown

---
layout: post
comments: false

> title: "Modern Docker images: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Old images"

Author: Done. In case you didn't get, "How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Old images" is a reference to Stanley Kubrick's movie, "Dr. Strangelove".

> title: "Modern Docker images: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Old images"

Reviewer: Yes, that is fine (i didn't know about the specific movie, but I knew it was a popular sentence), I like the quote, it can stay, it was about the other part: "Modern Docker Images" was too generic, a bit more of info would help.

> meta_description: "Conan Docker Tools: New Docker images which should become the official ones"

Author: Done, added more information.

## Conan Docker Images: Revisited

The pull request [#204](https://github.com/conan-io/conan-docker-tools/pull/204) showed us some weak points to consider:

* Installing Clang via LLVM's APT repository does not guarantee full compatibility with ``libstdc++`` version used to
build
GCC
* APT packages that were requirements for GCC and Clang were still present, further inflating the final image
* The packages provided through Ubuntu do not have older versions available, in case a new version comes along. This
affects the reproducibility requirement.
* Older compilers were always an issue in terms of maintenance once they arrived in the EOL (end-of-life) state. It was
necessary to update the PPA address and build the images again
* The continuous integration service used, although it was considerably fast, it was not possible to customize and
prioritize the build, if necessary.

Noticing the listed issues, we took a more radical solution, even though it took more time to implement, but resulted
in something better in terms of maintainability and practicality.

Therefore, we decided to abandon PR #204 and start again from scratch, considering the items listed above.

> ## A new plan

Reviewer: A new plan: Creating images with blah, blah.. (summarize the key point of the new plan)

Author: Done. Added a summary on the bottom of that section.

One of the problems we would like to solve is the compiler used and its libraries, we always wanted to be independent
of the Linux distribution. In the initial pull request, we built the GCC from sources, while the Clang uses
prebuilt. So, we chose to build both from sources in order to have more control over the compiler used.

The library ``libstdc++`` is distributed along with the GCC project. We chose to use a single version of the library,
which
was neither the newest, to allow older distributions to use, but also not so old, so that new features can be consumed
by newer compilers. The version chosen was ``libstdc++.so.6.0.28``, the same distributed with GCC 9 and 10.

Ubuntu 16.04 Xenial LTS is still the base used, its support will be until April 2024. After that date, we will need to
update the images to a newer version of the distribution, in addition to rebuilding all available official packages.

So forward thinking is having fewer images, but better support, without the drastic breakage and incompatibility issues

## From blueprint to prototype

During prototyping, we realized that we could divide the process of building a Docker image into 3 phases:

> The base, where all common packages are installed to all images, such as Python, git, svn, etc, in addition to the

Reviewer: Are we missing bullet items or numbered items 1, 2, 3? Is this the result from copying from a doc maybe?

Author: bullets! good catch!

Author: Done, updated.

    && sudo cp -a /tmp/install/lib64/ /usr/local/ \
    && sudo cp -a /tmp/install/libexec/ /usr/local/ \
    && sudo cp -a /tmp/install/lib/* /usr/local/lib/ \
    && sudo cp -a /tmp/install/bin/* /usr/local/bin/ \
    && sudo rm -rf /tmp/install \
    && sudo update-alternatives --install /usr/local/bin/cc cc /usr/local/bin/gcc 100 \
    && sudo update-alternatives --install /usr/local/bin/cpp cpp /usr/local/bin/g++ 100 \
    && sudo update-alternatives --install /usr/local/bin/c++ c++ /usr/local/bin/g++ 100 \
    && sudo rm /etc/ld.so.cache \
    && sudo ldconfig -C /etc/ld.so.cache \
    && conan config init --force

{% endhighlight %}

In this section, the base image used is the same one we created before, through a caching mechanism, this drastically
reduces the final image build time.
Also, all artifacts generated from GCC are now copied to their respective locations. Finally, the compiler becomes the
default in the image and the libraries are listed and cached. And here's the icing on the cake, the same recipe works
from GCC 5 to the latest version, just modifying some arguments. The maintenance has been drastically simplified
compared to current Conan Docker Tools.

> ## Conan meets the Wyvern

Reviewer: Maybe a bit more of information, like: ``Conan meets the Wyvern: Building Clang C/C++ compiler from source``.

Author: Yes, good add. Actually I didn't know about Wyvern until this post, for me, that was a dragon only.

Author: Done

FROM ${DOCKER_USERNAME}/gcc${LIBSTDCPP_MAJOR_VERSION}-${DISTRO}:${DOCKER_TAG} as libstdcpp

FROM ${DOCKER_USERNAME}/base-${DISTRO}:${DOCKER_TAG} as deploy

ARG LIBSTDCPP_VERSION
ARG LIBSTDCPP_PATCH_VERSION

ARG DOCKER_USERNAME
ARG DOCKER_TAG
ARG DISTRO

COPY --from=builder /tmp/install /tmp/clang
COPY --from=libstdcpp /usr/local /tmp/gcc

RUN sudo mv /tmp/gcc/lib64 /usr/local/ \
    && sudo ln -s -f /usr/local/lib64/libstdc++.so.6.0.${LIBSTDCPP_PATCH_VERSION} /usr/local/lib64/libstdc++.so.6 \
    && sudo ln -s -f /usr/local/lib64/libstdc++.so.6 /usr/local/lib64/libstdc++.so \
    && sudo cp -a /tmp/gcc/include/* /usr/local/include/ \
    && sudo rm -rf /usr/lib/gcc/x86_64-linux-gnu/* \
    && sudo cp -a /tmp/gcc/lib/gcc/x86_64-linux-gnu/${LIBSTDCPP_VERSION} /usr/lib/gcc/x86_64-linux-gnu/ \
    && sudo cp -a /tmp/gcc/lib/* /usr/local/lib/ \
    ...

{% endhighlight %}

Similar to what was done with GCC, in Clang we also use the same base image and copy the artifacts generated by the
compiler to the ``/usr/local`` directory. However, the ``libstdc++`` library was extracted from the GCC 10 image. This
is a necessity of the possible configurations supported by Conan.

> ## Tests and more tests

Reviewer: Tests and more tests: A CI pipeline to test docker images

Author: Done.

To ensure that the images produced met our requirements, we needed to add new tests that cover in addition to what was
already tested in Conan Docker Tools. Until then, a single script was used which validated a series of builds, versions
of installed binaries and user permissions. The content of the new tests can be seen
[here](https://github.com/conan-io/conan-docker-tools/tree/feature/single-image/modern/tests).

We introduced greater modularization in the tests, dividing the steps into separate scripts, to serve each compiler
closer. With the support for Fortran, it was necessary to adapt a test that covered it. Furthermore, many applications
that are now bundled with Conan are no longer part of the base image and this has also been validated.

If you want to test locally a produced Docker image, you can easily run:

{% highlight bash %}

$ cd modern && pytest tests --image conanio/gcc10-ubuntu16.04 --service deploy -vv --user 0:0

{% endhighlight %}

> ## The CI service change

Reviewer: The CI service change: From Travis to...

Author: Done, also mentioned Jenkins.

The pull request [#204](https://github.com/conan-io/conan-docker-tools/pull/204) showed us some weak points to consider:

* Installing Clang via LLVM's APT repository does not guarantee full compatibility with ``libstdc++`` version used to
build
GCC
* APT packages that were requirements for GCC and Clang were still present, further inflating the final image
* The packages provided through Ubuntu do not have older versions available, in case a new version comes along. This
affects the reproducibility requirement.
* Older compilers were always an issue in terms of maintenance once they arrived in the EOL (end-of-life) state. It was
necessary to update the PPA address and build the images again
* The continuous integration service used, although it was considerably fast, it was not possible to customize and
prioritize the build, if necessary.

Noticing the listed issues, we took a more radical solution, even though it took more time to implement, but resulted
in something better in terms of maintainability and practicality.

Therefore, we decided to abandon PR #204 and start again from scratch, considering the items listed above.

## A new plan: Creating images with same base

> Before we start implementing new recipes with their proper corrections, we first need to understand what the objective

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before we start implementing new dockerfiles with their proper corrections, we first need to understand what the objective
```

maybe in the Conan context, the word `recipes` is too related to packages. I think we should change the word in all the document.

behind it all is. We would like to understand what the expectation is for these new images 2 years from now. As we have

> seen before, in a few years we have reached over 40 recipes. Also, one of the points discussed is whether there will be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
seen before, in a few years with the current approach we are already maintaining over 40 different dockerfiles. Also, one of the points discussed is whether there will be
```

rotation to avoid the accumulation of old images and their restrictions in terms of maintenance.

For current and already available images on hub.docker, these will be kept but no longer supported (new versions will
not be introduced). Your recipes and images will remain available, as their immediate removal would result in
catastrophic failure for many users. They will eventually be removed, but at a distant date and to be defined.

> As for the new images, these will be adopted as official and widely promoted for use by all users. The transition
> should take place in a few months after release, because it will be necessary to rebuild the packages that already

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As for the new images, these will be adopted as official and widely promoted for use by all users. The transition
to the new images in Conan Center should take place in a few months after release, because it will be necessary to rebuild the packages that already
```

exist in the Conan Center and replace them, this is to ensure full compatibility between packages. As for rotation and
maintenance, we believe it is necessary to rotate supported compilers over time, to avoid a large build, effort and
maintenance load for old images and packages that are not always used by the community. Therefore, the following rule
will be adopted:
* Clang will be supported in the 3 newest versions. Older versions will be available for download but will not receive

> updates.

Reviewer 2: We are supporting only 3 newest Clang versions because the build system changed and it would increase the complexity of the dockerfile... but we expect new versions to follow use the same build-system and parameters, so we can keep adding versions of Clang without deprecating old ones (**remember this is about docker-images, not about ConanCenter**).

I think we should state here that we are starting on Clang 10.0 because of this circumstance, but we might keep adding new versions without removing old ones as long as the same build script works. **Same argument for GCC.**

Author: done

* GCC on the other hand, is widely used for the Linux environment and only version 4.x was left out.

One of the problems we would like to solve is the compiler used and its libraries, we always wanted to be independent

> of the Linux distribution. In the initial pull request, we built the GCC from sources, while the Clang uses

Reviewer 2: Explain why: _"packages generated using these images (packages in ConanCenter) should work out-of-the-box in as many as possible different distros/versions"_.

prebuilt. So, we chose to build both from sources in order to have more control over the compiler used.

The library ``libstdc++`` is distributed along with the GCC project. We chose to use a single version of the library,
which
was neither the newest, to allow older distributions to use, but also not so old, so that new features can be consumed

> by newer compilers. The version chosen was ``libstdc++.so.6.0.28``, the same distributed with GCC 9 and 10.

Reviewer 2: The reason why we choose `6.0.28` is because it is the _default_ one for the latest LTS version. According to this rule, whenever a new LTS is released, we should check and change it.

Anyway this is only true for Clang, not for GCC. This paragraph can be misleading.

Author: done

Ubuntu 16.04 Xenial LTS is still the base used, its support will be until April 2024. After that date, we will need to

> update the images to a newer version of the distribution, in addition to rebuilding all available official packages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
update the images to a newer version of the distribution.
```

We don't need to rebuild packages, right? If we move to a new version (new `glibc`) everything already built should work.

So forward thinking is having fewer images, but better support, without the drastic breakage and incompatibility issues.
To summarize the plan:

* Ubuntu 16.04 LTS as base Docker image
* Build Clang and GCC from source
* Use libstdc++.so.0.6.28 for all new Docker images
* Use glibc 2.23 for all new Docker images

> * Rotate old compiler versions to keep better support in the future

Reviewer 2: Images for old compilers will be built as long as their build script is compatible with the one for the newer compilers.

Author: done.

to be installed. The complete recipe can be obtained
[here](https://github.com/conan-io/conan-docker-tools/blob/feature/single-image/modern/base/Dockerfile), but let's look
at a few pieces:

{% highlight docker %}

ARG DISTRO_VERSION
FROM ubuntu:${DISTRO_VERSION}

ENV PYENV_ROOT=/opt/pyenv \
    PATH=/opt/pyenv/shims:${PATH}

ARG CMAKE_VERSION
ARG CMAKE_VERSION_FULL
ARG PYTHON_VERSION
ARG CONAN_VERSION

{% endhighlight %}

Now, both the distribution version and the installed packages are configurable in terms of version used. Previously, a
script was used to update all 42 recipes as needed!

{% highlight docker %}

RUN printf '/usr/local/lib64\n' >> /etc/ld.so.conf.d/20local-lib.conf \
    && printf '/usr/local/lib\n' > /etc/ld.so .conf.d/20local-lib.conf \
    ...

{% endhighlight %}

In order to not be affected by system packages or Conan packages that invoke ``apt-get``, the compiler and its
artifacts are installed in ``/usr/local``. However, this is not enough to prioritize the order ``libstdc++`` used, for
that we need to update ``ldconfig`` with the local directories. Until then, this was not necessary in the previous

> images, as everything was either consumed directly from the system, or installed directly in /usr.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
images, as everything was either consumed directly from the system, or installed directly in ``/usr``.
```

These are the main features of the base image, which is used in all final images.

## Building GCC from source

Now let's look at the GCC build image, the full recipe can be found
[here](https://github.com/conan-io/conan-docker-tools/blob/feature/single-image/modern/gcc/Dockerfile), but let's
highlight a few points:

{% highlight docker %}

RUN cd gcc-${GCC_VERSION} \
    && ./configure --build=x86_64-linux-gnu --disable-bootstrap --disable-multilib ...

{% endhighlight %}

No matter the version, GCC continues to use the same lines for its build.
Some factors were configured in this version used:
* The multilib support was discarded as we are only interested in producing packages with 64-bit support.
* Fortran support has been added, thus producing ``gfortran`` together in the image. Currently the Conan package for
``gfortran`` is totally broken and has a complex dependencies chain to fix.
* Bootstrap has been disabled to reduce build time to just 20 minutes.

> 

Reviewer 2: IMHO, here we are describing the images for GCC, so I would avoid any _consideration_, _original intent_, _idea_,... I would just describe the dockerfile and the decisions as they are implemented. Any consideration, history, intent, rationale, should be moved above, to the discussion before the description.

We already had a **blueprint** (see the title of this section), here it goes the implementation.

Author: Do you mean, move this part to the first one, about history, etc and keep this part only with the Dockerfile right?

Reviewer 2: Yes, please. 

In the first part it is said
> The library ``libstdc++`` is distributed along with the GCC project. We chose to use a single version of the library, which was neither the newest, to allow older distributions to use, but also not so old, so that new features can be consumed by newer compilers. The version chosen was ``libstdc++.so.6.0.28``, the same distributed with GCC 9 and 10, but also is the default version in Ubuntu 20.04 LTS (Focal).

which is not the way it is in the final images. People reading only the first part should we aware that it was the intention, but finally it was not possible and **each GCC version will use the _corresponding_ libstdc++ version**.

---

Here there are more like _implementation details_, something more straightforward: _"finally we are building GCC from sources and the `libstdc++` library as well, so each docker image will use the libstdc++ version corresponding to the GCC version."_

each attempt, a long wait was needed to get the result.
* Until Clang 9 release, ``libc++`` was not automatically added to be linked when using Clang. As a solution, the
project supports a configuration file, where ``libc++`` can be specified by default. However, this behavior changes
between versions 6, 7 and 8, requiring different standards and making it difficult to use the same Docker recipe for
all versions.
* With the removal of the GCC dependency, it was necessary to use ``libunwind`` during the build. It is already
internalized in LLVM, but used as a dynamic library only. So a question arises, what happens if a project uses the
image with Clang and installs Conan's libunwind package? A big mess when linking, is the answer. Clang tries to link
the version distributed by the Conan package, resulting in several errors. As a workaround, we renamed the original
LLVM ``libunwind`` to ``libllvm-unwind``.

With all the advents and limitations, it became quite difficult to maintain from Clang 6 to 12. After a lot of
discussions and advices from some of the LLVM maintainers, we decided to limit Clang support to starting from version

> 9, because it is not necessary to apply as many modifications, including the configuration file. Also, in the Linux

Reviewer 2: IIRC

```suggestion
10, because it is not necessary to apply as many modifications, including the configuration file. Also, in the Linux
```

Author: Correct.

of installed binaries and user permissions. The content of the new tests can be seen
[here](https://github.com/conan-io/conan-docker-tools/tree/feature/single-image/modern/tests).

We introduced greater modularization in the tests, dividing the steps into separate scripts, to serve each compiler
closer. With the support for Fortran, it was necessary to adapt a test that covered it. Furthermore, many applications
that are now bundled with Conan are no longer part of the base image and this has also been validated.

If you want to test locally a produced Docker image, you can easily run:

{% highlight bash %}

$ cd modern && pytest tests --image conanio/gcc10-ubuntu16.04 --service deploy -vv --user 0:0

{% endhighlight %}

## The CI service change: From Travis to Azure and the Jenkins arrival

Since the beginning of the project, Conan Docker Tools has always used CI services such as Travis and Azure. However,
this did not give us the full power to prioritize the build in the queue, or customize the host, or customize the build
lines to use Docker-in-Docker if necessary.

> With that in mind, we started using Jenkins from the Conan Center to also build the new Docker images. The big

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With that in mind, we started using Jenkins to also build the new Docker images. The big
```

advantage in this is the use of features for cache in Docker. Previously, a single job took up to 2h if it was on other
services, without the use of caching. Now, using Jenkins and Docker ``--cache-from``, updating a package, from base
image to final image, takes just 4 minutes per job. The Jenkinsfile file used can be viewed
[here](https://github.com/conan-io/conan-docker-tools/blob/feature/single-image/.ci/xenial.jenkinsfile).

Although the file looks complicated at first glance, it is still possible to use docker-compose to build an image from
scratch. As an example, let's use Clang 12:

{% highlight bash %}

> $ cd modern && docker-compose build clang12

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$ cd modern 
$ docker-compose build base
$ docker-compose build clang12-builder
$ docker-compose build clang12
```

Without all these steps, docker could use an existing image with the same name and won't use updated values from the `.env` file.

    && sudo cp -a /tmp/install/lib/* /usr/local/lib/ \
    && sudo cp -a /tmp/install/bin/* /usr/local/bin/ \
    && sudo rm -rf /tmp/install \
    && sudo update-alternatives --install /usr/local/bin/cc cc /usr/local/bin/gcc 100 \
    && sudo update-alternatives --install /usr/local/bin/cpp cpp /usr/local/bin/g++ 100 \
    && sudo update-alternatives --install /usr/local/bin/c++ c++ /usr/local/bin/g++ 100 \
    && sudo rm /etc/ld.so.cache \
    && sudo ldconfig -C /etc/ld.so.cache \
    && conan config init --force

{% endhighlight %}

In this section, the base image used is the same one we created before, through a caching mechanism, this drastically
reduces the final image build time.
Also, all artifacts generated from GCC are now copied to their respective locations. Finally, the compiler becomes the
default in the image and the libraries are listed and cached. And here's the icing on the cake, the same recipe works
from GCC 5 to the latest version, just modifying some arguments. The maintenance has been drastically simplified
compared to current Conan Docker Tools.

### Conan meets the Wyvern: Building Clang C/C++ compiler from source

> 

Reviewer 2: Same for some of these topics, this is more the journey/problems/failures/final-design, it should go to the first part. Here people will expect to read something more focused on building Clang and the dockerfile.... and people reading the first part deserves to know about these things.

At least, in Part#1 they should read about the final `stdlibc++` installed and why, and the reason why we are discarding all clang versions before 10... probably the details CMake build-system, libraries,... should remain here as they are very related to the commands that are written in the dockerfile.

maintenance load for old images and packages that are not always used by the community. Therefore, the following rule
will be adopted:
* Clang will be supported from 10.0 to the newest version.
* GCC on the other hand, is widely used for the Linux environment and only version 4.x was left out.
* For both compilers we will keep updating all new compiler versions and Conan client version, according new releases.
* The multilib support was discarded as we are only interested in producing packages with 64-bit support.
* Fortran support has been added, thus producing ``gfortran`` together in the image. Currently the Conan package for
``gfortran`` is totally broken and has a complex dependencies chain to fix.

One of the problems we would like to solve is the compiler used and its libraries, we always wanted to be independent
of the Linux distribution. In the initial pull request, we built the GCC from sources, while the Clang uses
prebuilt. So, we chose to build both from sources in order to have more control over the compiler used.
Also, packages generated using these images (packages in ConanCenter) should work out-of-the-box in as many as possible
different distros.

> The library ``libstdc++`` is distributed along with the GCC project. We chose to use a single version of the library,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The library ``libstdc++`` is distributed along with the GCC project. The intention was to use a single version of the library,
```

which
was neither the newest, to allow older distributions to use, but also not so old, so that new features can be consumed
by newer compilers. The version chosen was ``libstdc++.so.6.0.28``, the same distributed with GCC 9 and 10, but also

> is the default version in Ubuntu 20.04 LTS (Focal). Once GCC 10 is built, its ``libstdc++`` generated is copied to an
> Artifactory instance and this is downloaded directly to
> each final image. Actually, that was the original intent, but as we will see, that was not possible. While we were

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is the default version in Ubuntu 20.04 LTS (Focal). Once GCC 10 was built it should be possible to copy
this library to the rest of the images. Actually, that was the original intent, but as we will see, that was
not possible. While we were
```

> developing the new recipes, GCC 11 was released and along with it, the version was ``libstdc++`` already ``.29``, which
> made usage incompatible. In this case, we are left with the following dilemma:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
developing the new recipes, GCC 11 was released and, with it, a new ``libstdc++`` version (``6.0.29``).
It was not possible to use the previous version with this new compiler. We were left with the following
dilemma:
```

* Using the same libstdc++ version, except for GCC 11.

>     * Conan Center becomes homogeneous, everything can be used without compiler restriction and distribution

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * Conan Center becomes homogeneous (except GCC 11): all binaries will be built and linked using the same ``libstdc++`` version, which guarantees that all can run in any image.
```

    * Binaries can hardly be used outside of Conan Center because they need the newest version of libstdc++ library

> that is not yet available in official PPA. All build requirements would be broken.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
that is not yet available in the official PPA. All executables built inside ConanCenter won't work in the users' machines.
```

    * A possible solution would be to statically link libstdc++ in all binaries, but this solution has a number of
risks.
* Each image uses the corresponding version of libstdc++ provided by the compiler.
    * Better than the current scenario, where it is dependent on PPA and we have no control over it.
    * All images still use the same version of glibc, another advantage over the current scenario.

>     * We will need to take care of the build requirements, as they will only be compatible with later versions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * We will need to take care of the executables, as they will only be compatible with later versions (as they are now).
```

    * Better for users, than the current scenario. The requirements related to libstdc++ are the same, but the glibc

> version is still the same version for everyone.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
version is the same version for all the packages.
```

Given the conditions and risks, we chose to go the second way: **Use the libstdc++ version available together with the
compiler**.

Ubuntu 16.04 Xenial LTS is still the base used, its support will be until April 2024. After that date, we will need to
update the images to a newer version of the distribution, in addition to rebuilding all available official packages.

> 

Reviewer 2: Here we need the paragraph about Clang and the `libstdc++` version that was chosen (and why).

Author: Done

So forward thinking is having fewer images, but better support, without the drastic breakage and incompatibility issues.
To summarize the plan:

* Ubuntu 16.04 LTS as base Docker image
* Build Clang and GCC from source
* Use libstdc++ provided by the compiler
* Use glibc 2.23 for all new Docker images
* Images for old compilers will be built as long as their build script is compatible with the one for the newer compilers.

> ### From blueprint to prototype: Writing the new Docker recipes

Reviewer 2: Move this section to Part#2, it is about dockerfiles

Author: Done

script was used to update all 42 recipes as needed!

{% highlight docker %}

RUN printf '/usr/local/lib64\n' >> /etc/ld.so.conf.d/20local-lib.conf \
    && printf '/usr/local/lib\n' > /etc/ld.so .conf.d/20local-lib.conf \
    ...

{% endhighlight %}

In order to not be affected by system packages or Conan packages that invoke ``apt-get``, the compiler and its
artifacts are installed in ``/usr/local``. However, this is not enough to prioritize the order ``libstdc++`` used, for
that we need to update ``ldconfig`` with the local directories. Until then, this was not necessary in the previous
images, as everything was either consumed directly from the system, or installed directly in ``/usr``.

These are the main features of the base image, which is used in all final images.

For the construction of Clang, we tried to make it available from version 6.0 to 12, but we had a series of obstacles
and challenges that made us change our mind. Here we will share a little bit of this long journey of CMake files and
compilation hours. To see the full recipe, it is available
[here](https://github.com/conan-io/conan-docker-tools/blob/feature/single-image/modern/clang/Dockerfile).

> ### Training the Dragon: Clang Dockefile

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Training the Dragon: Building Clang from sources
```

is a necessity of the possible configurations supported by Conan.

Besides that, Clang requires some interesting CMake definitions:
* LLVM_ENABLE_PROJECTS: Only enable what we want, otherwise we will have tons of binaries and hours of build
* LLVM_USE_LINKER: We enforce LLVM linker (lld). It's faster than GNU ld and reduces the total building time

{% highlight docker %}

...
&& ninja unwind \
&& ninja cxxabi \
&& cp lib/libc++abi* /usr/lib/ \
&& ninja cxx \
&& ninja clang \

{% endhighlight %}

If we run `ninja` command alone, it builds more projects than we want configured as enabled, so we
build one by one.
Also, `libcxx` has a limitation when building using `libc++abi`, it searches on system library folder,
not the internal folders first.

### Tests and more tests: A CI pipeline to test Docker images

To ensure that the images produced met our requirements, we needed to add new tests that cover in addition to what was
already tested in Conan Docker Tools. Until then, a single script was used which validated a series of builds, versions
of installed binaries and user permissions. The content of the new tests can be seen

> [here](https://github.com/conan-io/conan-docker-tools/tree/feature/single-image/modern/tests).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[here](https://github.com/conan-io/conan-docker-tools/tree/master/modern/tests).
```

that are now bundled with Conan are no longer part of the base image and this has also been validated.

If you want to test locally a produced Docker image, you can easily run:

{% highlight bash %}

$ cd modern && pytest tests --image conanio/gcc10-ubuntu16.04 --service deploy -vv --user 0:0

{% endhighlight %}

### The CI service change: From Travis to Azure and the Jenkins arrival

Since the beginning of the project, Conan Docker Tools has always used CI services such as Travis and Azure. However,
this did not give us the full power to prioritize the build in the queue, or customize the host, or customize the build
lines to use Docker-in-Docker if necessary.

With that in mind, we started using Jenkins to also build the new Docker images. The big
advantage in this is the use of features for cache in Docker. Previously, a single job took up to 2h if it was on other
services, without the use of caching. Now, using Jenkins and Docker ``--cache-from``, updating a package, from base
image to final image, takes just 4 minutes per job. The Jenkinsfile file used can be viewed

> [here](https://github.com/conan-io/conan-docker-tools/blob/feature/single-image/.ci/xenial.jenkinsfile).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[here](https://github.com/conan-io/conan-docker-tools/blob/master/.ci/xenial.jenkinsfile).
```

to Jenkins due to effort and maintenance.

### How to build a Conan package with new Docker images

After building our new images, we are ready to build our Conan packages. Let's take Boost as our example.

{% highlight shell %}

$ docker run --rm -ti -v ${HOME}/.conan/data:/home/conan/.conan/data conanio/gcc10-ubuntu16.04:1.39.0
conan@148a77cfbc33:~$ conan install boost/1.76.0@ --build
conan@148a77cfbc33:~$ exit

{% endhighlight %}

Here, we start a temporary Docker container with interactive support. Also, we share our Conan cache data as volume.
After starting, we build Boost 1.76.0 and its dependencies from source. All packages will be built and installed to
the shared volume, so we can use it after closing the container. To finish and remove the container, we just need to
exit.

{% highlight shell %}

$ docker run -d -t -v ${HOME}/.conan/data:/home/conan/.conan/data --name conan_container conanio/gcc10
$ docker exec conan_container conan install boost/1.76.0@ --build
$ docker stop conan_container
$ docker rm conan_container

{% endhighlight %}

Similar execution, same result. Instead of creating a temporary Docker container, we executed it on background.

> All container commands are passed by `conan exec` command. Also, we need to stop and remove manually after finishing.

Reviewer 3: Maybe this is what you were trying to say?
```suggestion
All the Conan commands are passed via `docker exec` command. Also, we need to stop and remove manually after finishing.
```
